At this point in the course, you now know two quantities of bivariate statistical dependencies mutual
information and covariance.
If you've been wondering how those two relate to each other, then you are definitely going to enjoy
learning from this video.
And if you haven't wondered that question, then that's even better, because now you'll get to learn
something that you didn't even know that you wanted to learn about.
So I can just tell you the short version of the story.
The TLDR covariance is best interpreted with normally distributed data and only measures linear interactions.
Whereas mutual information is a nonlinear measure, it can detect both linear and nonlinear dependencies.
But just because it detects more kinds of interactions doesn't necessarily mean that it's better.
Covariance has a lot of great mathematical properties that make it really useful for analyses, including,
for example, principal components analysis.
Covariance is also fast and numerically stable to calculate, and it doesn't depend on any additional
parameters.
Anyway, the purpose of this video here is to remind you of the formula for covariance.
And then I'll show some Python code demos about how these two measures of dependencies relate to each
other.
And then over the next several videos, you will implement both mutual information and covariance in
data.
So you can see how they compare.
And you will see that there are some insights that can be gained from one or the other analysis.
Sometimes they overlap, but sometimes they give unique patterns of results.
So here is the formula for covariance between two variables X and y.
It's basically just the dot product between two variables.
So element wise multiplication and sum.
Now you do need to make sure both variables are mean centered.
Otherwise there can be a bias introduced by the mean offsets between the variables.
Now this bias by the mean offset actually is a desired result for cosine similarity, but for covariance
and correlation, we actually do not want mean offsets to introduce systematic biases.
And scaling by n minus one is a normalization factor that prevents the covariance term from just trivially
increasing by having more and more data.
So you can think of this as like an average.
Now the reason why you subtract one and not just divide by n has to do with the degrees of freedom of
a covariance analysis, and the fact that we already know that the average value is zero.
So you can see that this is a linear measure of dependency because we only have scalar multiplication
and addition.
There's no logs or any nonlinear operations in this formula.
Now one last point that I would like to make here is that the scale of the data is preserved in covariance.
So imagine we were calculating the covariance of income in a group of people.
Now if both units of both variables have units of, let's say euros, then the covariance has units
of euros squared.
So the fact that covariance retains the scale of the data is sometimes useful, sometimes weird, sometimes
annoying, But always something to be aware of.
And that is going to be relevant in a few videos from now.
When we directly compare covariance across transformer blocks versus mutual information across transformer
blocks.
Now, as I mentioned, uh, two videos ago, mutual information does not have the units of the data
because mutual information is not actually calculated directly from the data.
It's calculated from the probability distribution that is estimated from the data.
Anyway, this is the formula for pairwise mutual a pairwise covariance.
If you have a bunch of variables, a collection of variables, and you want to calculate the covariance
between all pairs of variables, you can run a double for loop over all of the pairs.
But because covariance is linear, then we can use linear algebra to simplify things.
So if you put all of the variables into the columns of a matrix, then you can get all of the pairwise
covariances simply by multiplying the matrix by its transpose.
And this equation here is valid if all of the variables are mean centered before being put into matrix
X.
On this slide, I want to give a comparison of mutual information and covariance.
Now some of this information I've already mentioned before, but it's a good review and expansion of
the important differences.
Okay, this point I've definitely already mentioned and explained the reasoning behind.
So covariance measures only linear interactions, whereas mutual information gets any statistical dependencies
between the variables.
If there are both linear and non-linear interactions, then the covariance will measure only the linear
parts and ignore the non-linear interactions.
Covariance is based on assumptions about the mean and symmetry of dispersion and interpretation of standard
deviations, and so on.
The data don't need to be exactly perfectly normally distributed, but covariance is best interpreted
in data that are at least roughly normally distributed in the sense of having one central peak with
decaying probabilities on either side.
Now it turns out that the pre activations tend to be the fairly normally distributed.
On the other hand, the post non-linearity activations can still be appropriate for covariance analyses
in some cases.
Now, in terms of the assumptions for, Or mutual information.
The thing to keep in mind is that if you do not sample the probability space, then there's literally
no data in that part of space.
So that can be problematic for generalization and interpretation.
So an underlying assumption of mutual information is that your data have fully sampled the probability
space.
You've already seen examples of where that assumption is violated even in the simulated data.
And over the next several videos, you'll see again where in real life activation data that this assumption
is violated.
And you'll also see that there are outliers or extreme values.
And those can be problematic for mutual information analysis because they expand the space for the probability
calculations, but still leave this very sparse sampling of that probability space.
So one approach to dealing with that is to exclude extreme data points for the analysis.
But it's also not really an optimal solution because it means that we are removing some potentially
insightful data in order to preserve statistical robustness.
And that trade off you will often need to make in data science.
Anyway, we'll get back to that point.
So this difference is pretty interesting.
It highlights one advantage of covariance over mutual information.
Covariance is signed, meaning it can take on positive or negative values.
And as you know covariance.
Covariance means that when one variable goes up, the other one goes down.
Mutual information is unsigned, so it cannot be negative.
And that means that negative correlations and positive correlations will both manifest as positive mutual
information values.
And I'll show you an example of that in the Python demo in a few minutes.
Okay.
And this point I've also already mentioned covariance is calculated directly from the data values.
Whereas with mutual information you need to first estimate a probability distribution from the data,
and then the analysis is done on the probability distribution.
Now in principle that's fine, but in practice it means that you need to choose a resolution for estimating
that probability distribution.
And that is a parameter that can change the entropy values and therefore also the mutual information
results.
And finally covariance is definitely from a practical perspective it's better.
It's fast.
It's easy to calculate.
It's robust to undersampling or weird numerical issues, and that's because you're not taking logs of
zero or tiny numbers.
Now, that's not to say that you can never calculate or trust mutual information, of course, but there
are some additional practical concerns for mutual information that you just don't have to worry about
with covariance.
Okay.
With that theoretical discussion out of the way, let me now give you an overview of what I will show
you in the Python demo.
In the first part of the demo, I will simulate some data sets that have linear or nonlinear dependencies,
and that will illustrate several features of covariance and mutual information, including the fact
that nonlinear relationships have zero or at least near zero covariance, whereas those nonlinear dependencies
can be measured with mutual information, and also that both positive and negative covariance values
have positive mutual information values.
In the next part of the demo, I will demonstrate the relationship between covariance and mutual information
in linear interactions by varying the strength of the correlation in simulated data.
And then we'll create a plot that looks like this, where the x axis shows the strength and sign of
the correlation in the data, and the y axis shows either covariance or mutual information.
Now the covariance tracks the linear relationship in the data basically perfectly, plus some noise
and sampling variability, whereas the mutual information shows this U-shaped pattern, which happens
because mutual information is unsigned.
So a negative correlation has the same mutual information as a positive correlation.
This plot here shows a covariance plotted as a function of mutual information, and you can see that
they have a non-linear relationship to each other.
Okay.
So that's the top two plots.
The bottom two plots show the same data the same results.
But I squared the covariance values.
And now you can see that the two measures look quite similar to each other.
The last thing we will explore in this code demo is something I mentioned a couple times already in
the past two videos, and that is the difference between the mutual information calculated manually
as a direct translation of the formula and the scikit learn implementation.
As you saw in a previous video, there are biases and numerical inaccuracies that are introduced by
the manual method, which basically comes from undersampling the entire probability space.
This diagonal line here is the expected result.
If the manual implementation and the scikit learn implementation were exactly identical.
And what you see is that all the dots lie on a line more or less, again with some variation due to
noise and sampling, but they're basically lying on a line.
But that line is shifted above the unity line.
And what does that mean?
That means that the relative mutual information values are all fine.
They're all preserved.
But the manual implementation simply introduces an upward bias, an upward shift.
This is an important result because it has implications for which method you should use for large data
sets.
Now, the thing is that the scikit learn method is just too slow to be of practical use when you have
a ton of data.
So the conclusion here is that as long as you are comparing relative values and not the absolute mutual
information value, it's fine to use the faster and more efficient manual implementation.
All right, let's switch to code and have a look at this demo.
Here are the libraries that we will use here.
And first let me demonstrate an example case.
So I'm actually going to first show the results and then show what the code looks like.
Okay so here we see a positive covariance.
It's pretty clear that the data go up and down together.
So there's a positive correlation here.
And what I did here was literally just multiply the data by minus one.
All I did was flip the sign of the data.
The covariance is exactly identical in magnitude.
It's just the sign flipped.
Okay.
So here we have a negative relationship.
but the mutual information is a positive and it's exactly the same number in both cases.
So let me show you that code here.
So that is so I start by generating variable x.
And then I generate a variable y in four different ways.
So in this case this is a formula for introducing a correlation between two variables.
So here I'm introducing a correlation of 0.7.
And yeah I'm not going to derive this formula.
That's something I discuss in my statistics course.
It doesn't matter here.
The point is that x and y are related to each other.
Okay.
So that's for y1.
And then y2 is literally just the negative of y1.
And that's how we get these two values over here.
Here I calculate the covariance between the variables.
And here is the mutual information between these two variables.
Okay.
So then over here with Y3.
That's pretty interesting.
I define y3 to be x but x squared.
And because there's going to be positive and negative numbers, the square basically becomes a quadratic.
And we get a nice smiley face with a little bit of noise.
So that you see here the smiley face with some noise the covariance.
This is a non-linear relationship in principle should be zero.
You're going to see it be non-zero just because there's sampling variability and noise okay.
So here we have a case where the just by chance that happened to work out to be a bit more symmetric
on the two sides.
So you see that the covariance here is basically zero between x and y.
Now obviously there is a statistical relationship between variable x and variable y.
It's just that that relationship is non-linear and not linear.
So the covariance only measures the linear part of the interactions, which means that the covariance
is zero.
And here we have something similar.
So this is I think I just create this as a cosine.
Yeah.
So I set y to be the cosine of x.
That's why you see it going up and down like this.
Again there's clearly statistical dependencies in the data.
Mutual information can measure those dependencies covariance and also correlation cannot.
Okay.
So that was the first demo here I'm going to run a more simulations of linear interactions.
So I'm going to manipulate the linear relationship between the two variables using the same formula
that I showed above.
So essentially x is random noise y is equal to x.
But then we knock it down by the correlation.
And then we add some innovations that are related to the negative of the reciprocal, the opposite of
the correlation.
Okay.
So basically what's going to happen is over this range of of numbers the data will be.
So the variables x and y will be correlated at between -0.9 and plus 0.9.
All linear correlations.
There's no non-linearities that we are introducing here.
So that means that covariance is an appropriate analysis.
And it also means that mutual information is not going to be able to distinguish between a correlation
of -0.8 and plus 0.8 okay.
So generate the data calculate the covariance and mutual information.
And here is the manual calculation of mutual information.
So remember this is from scikit learn that goes into index one here and then into index two is the manual
calculation of entropy.
And then mutual information over here.
Okay, then I'm just visualizing these results here.
You can see in the second row this is the covariance data.
And I'm just squaring it.
All I'm doing is squaring it.
I'm not changing the data at all.
I'm not squaring the data.
So we still have the linear measure of dependency statistical dependency.
And it's still capturing the linear relationships.
I'm just squaring the results.
The covariance and squaring the covariance gives us not exactly the identical results as mutual information,
but they are certainly very similar to each other, as opposed to when we are just looking at the like
the raw covariance.
Then we see that that follows the pattern of correlations.
But the mutual information only tracks the magnitude of the interactions and not the sign of the interactions.
Okay.
And then the very last thing that I'm doing here is looking at the relationship between the manual implementation
of a mutual information and the scikit learn implementation.
And as I showed in the slides, they are super duper strongly correlated, basically correlated at 0.99.
So it's nearly a perfect correlation with a little bit of variability.
Again that's just due to noise.
If you would increase the sample size for example.
So increase the amount of data that we're generating.
Then this would get even closer to one okay.
And again the conclusion here is that there is a shift.
There's a distributional shift a bias that gets introduced in our manual calculation because we are
undersampling the probability space scikit learn's implementation is a little bit smarter.
It's a little bit more sophisticated.
It has ways of using a kernel density The estimator to try to estimate the entire probability distribution,
and therefore it's a little bit more accurate in terms of the absolute values.
But the relative values don't matter.
That's all fine.
If you would subtract any two pairs, you'd get basically the same result for the manual implementation
versus the scikit learn implementation.
Mutual information and covariance are just different measures of statistical dependencies.
They each have their own advantages and limitations.
Sometimes you can predict which measure is the right one to use, but in lots of cases you just don't
really know a priori.
So you might just pick one, or you might try both and see how they compare.
In fact, in a code challenge in a couple videos from now, you will see that the two measures can sometimes
look dissimilar to each other, and sometimes they look really similar to each other.